# Lab 1: Hello World

The aim of this lab is to create a simple Python application to print out a welcome message for a simple Python application.

The aim is to merely print the welcome message. The application should therefore follow the same format as that presented in the lecture.

We will be using the PyCharm IDE for the course and this lab will take you through setting up a new project.

This lab is made up of the following steps:

- Getting PyCharm running
- Creating an application
- Run the application
- Expanding the application

---

## Step 1: Start up PyCharm

1. Start up the PyCharm IDE.
   
   After the splash screen has been shown, you should see the "Welcome to PyCharm IDE" dialog that allows you to create a "New Project", "Open" a project, or "Get from VCS" (Version Control System) an existing project.

2. Select the "New Project" button option.

   This will now show you the "New Project" dialog.

3. On this dialog, you can select the location for your new project, for example:

   - Select the appropriate location for your work.

4. Next, we will set up the Python Interpreter to use with your project. This option may be minimized; if it is, open it.

5. Once open, you can select an appropriate Python interpreter and the location for your project.

   - Depending on the option you used last time, you might find that the dialog has selected to use a previously configured interpreter.

   - If so, change this – first, make sure you select "New environment using". 

   - On the associated drop-down box, you can select which type of environment you want to use, including a venv (virtual environment), a Conda environment, or just the basic pip installation for your Python interpreter. We will use the Virtualenv (venv) option.

6. When you select this, you can then select the location for your venv installation. By default, it will be in the `venv` directory below your project location.

7. You can also select the version of Python (the base interpreter) to use with this venv.

   - In the following example, I am using the Python 3.9 interpreter and the local `venv` environment under my coursework directory.

8. Now click on "Create".

   The IDE will now open a simple program that it has generated for you in a file called `main.py`, for example:

9. Select everything in the file `main.py` and delete it.

---

## Step 2: Create an Application

1. We will now replace the auto-generated code in the `main.py` file with our hello world style application.

2. First, add the following statement to the file:

   ```python
   print('Hello World!')
   ```

---

## Step 3: Run the Application

1. To run this main program, you can click on the green arrow in the toolbar on the top right-hand side of the IDE. Alternatively, you can select the `main.py` file in the left-hand project view and from the right mouse menu, select "Run main".

2. The "Run" window will now open at the bottom of PyCharm with the output generated by your program.

---

## Step 4: Add Further Code

1. Modify your program so that it will print out the result of adding 2 and 3 together. This is done by using the `+` operator and two integer numbers, for example:

   ```python
   print(2 + 3)
   ```

2. Now rerun your program; you should see the output.

3. Finally, add the following statement to the end of your program:

   ```python
   print('-' * 25)
   ```

4. Now rerun your program – what does it do?
